README.md, before:

# dtools

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Tools for downloading and preparing datasets.

---

__Table of Contents__

* [Usage](#usage)
* [ESA Gaia Archive](#esa-gaia-archive)
* [NASA Exoplanet Archive](#nasa-exoplanet-archive)

---

## Usage

* Install [Node.py] with `pip3 install node.py`
* Install dependencies with `nppm3 install` from inside the dtools directory
* Run any script as `nodepy3 <path/to/script>`

  [Node.py]: https://nodepy.org/

## ESA Gaia Archive

The ESA's ([European Space Agency][3]) [GAIA satellite][4] data archive can
be found [here][2]. They provide a bulk download option in various formats.
With *dtools*, you can easily download all or specific parts from the archive.

    $ nodepy esa/gaia --parallel 4 --to ~/Desktop/GAIA --unpack
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:13,576]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-003.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:13,577]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-001.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:13,585]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-000.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:13,589]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-002.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:38,830]: Unpacking "GaiaSource_000-000-001.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:39,713]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-004.csv.gz" ...
    ...

__Options__

    $ nodepy esa/gaia --help
    Usage: gaia.py [OPTIONS]

    Options:
    --parallel INTEGER           Parallel downloads.
    --source [gaia|tgas]
    --format [csv|fits|votable]
    --root [gdr1|Gaia]
    --range1 PARSE_RANGE
    --range2 PARSE_RANGE
    --range3 PARSE_RANGE
    --generate-urls
    --to TEXT                    Destination download folder.
    --unpack / --no-unpack       Unpack downloaded archives.
    --overwrite-existing
    --help                       Show this message and exit.

  [2]: http://gea.esac.esa.int/archive/
  [3]: http://sci.esa.int/
  [4]: http://sci.esa.int/gaia/

## NASA Exoplanet Archive

The [NASA Exoplanet Archive][0] offers bulk data downloads which actually only
provides scripts for the bulk-download that in turn use `wget`. If you don't
have `wget` installed or you simply want to extract all URLs instead of
downloading them, this is where *dtools* comes in handy.

For example, you can download the [KELT] timeseries data from [here][1] (in
[IPAC Table Format] which can be read by [astropy]), extract the `.bat` files
and pass them to the script to extract the download URLs, or download them
immediately.

__Extract URLs__

    niklas@lx1 ~/repos/dtools
    $ nodepy3 nasa/exoplanetarchive extract-urls KELT_N*_wget.bat
    http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu:80/data/ETSS//KELT2/005/055/28/KELT_N02_lc_000001_V01_east_raw_lc.tbl
    http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu:80/data/ETSS//KELT2/005/055/73/KELT_N02_lc_000001_V01_east_tfa_lc.tbl
    http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu:80/data/ETSS//KELT2/005/055/28/KELT_N02_lc_007676_V01_west_raw_lc.tbl
    ...

__Execute Bulk Download__

    niklas@lx1 ~/repos/dtools
    $ nodepy3 nasa/exoplanetarchive bulk-download KELT_N*_wget.bat \
        --to ~/Desktop/KELT --parallel 4
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,556]: Spawning 4 threads ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,557]: Thread 0 started.
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,557]: Thread 1 started.
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,557]: Thread 2 started.
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,557]: Thread 3 started.
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,559]: Downloading "KELT_N04_lc_000001_V01_east_raw_lc.tbl" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,559]: Downloading "KELT_N04_lc_000001_V01_east_tfa_lc.tbl" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,561]: Downloading "KELT_N04_lc_020344_V01_west_raw_lc.tbl" ...
    ...

  [0]: https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/bulk_data_download/
  [1]: https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/bulk_data_download/KELT_wget.tar.gz
  [KELT]: https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/KELT.html
  [IPAC Table Format]: http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/applications/DDGEN/Doc/ipac_tbl.html
  [astropy]: http://docs.astropy.org

> **Tip**: You can use the [KELT] website to go to the Timeseries or Praesepe
> database search pages, conduct an empty search, wait for the results and then
> download the whole database in various formats (including IPAC .tbl and CSV).

Commit message:

add notice about size of the GAIA table

README.md, after:

# dtools

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Tools for downloading and preparing datasets.

---

__Table of Contents__

* [Usage](#usage)
* [ESA Gaia Archive](#esa-gaia-archive)
* [NASA Exoplanet Archive](#nasa-exoplanet-archive)

---

## Usage

* Install [Node.py] with `pip3 install node.py`
* Install dependencies with `nppm3 install` from inside the dtools directory
* Run any script as `nodepy3 <path/to/script>`

  [Node.py]: https://nodepy.org/

## ESA Gaia Archive

The ESA's ([European Space Agency][3]) [GAIA satellite][4] data archive can
be found [here][2]. They provide a bulk download option in various formats.
With *dtools*, you can easily download all or specific parts from the archive.

    $ nodepy esa/gaia --parallel 4 --to ~/Desktop/GAIA --unpack --range2 0
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:13,576]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-003.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:13,577]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-001.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:13,585]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-000.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:13,589]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-002.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:38,830]: Unpacking "GaiaSource_000-000-001.csv.gz" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-05 13:21:39,713]: Downloading "GaiaSource_000-000-004.csv.gz" ...
    ...

__Options__

    $ nodepy esa/gaia --help
    Usage: gaia.py [OPTIONS]

    Options:
    --parallel INTEGER           Parallel downloads.
    --source [gaia|tgas]
    --format [csv|fits|votable]
    --root [gdr1|Gaia]
    --range1 PARSE_RANGE
    --range2 PARSE_RANGE
    --range3 PARSE_RANGE
    --generate-urls
    --to TEXT                    Destination download folder.
    --unpack / --no-unpack       Unpack downloaded archives.
    --overwrite-existing
    --help                       Show this message and exit.

> *Note*: The full GAIA table (as of 2017/07/05) features 5231 table parts
> and its full uncompressed size amounts to about 510GB! The TGAS table
> consists of 16 parts and amounts to about 1.5GB (uncompressed).


  [2]: http://gea.esac.esa.int/archive/
  [3]: http://sci.esa.int/
  [4]: http://sci.esa.int/gaia/

## NASA Exoplanet Archive

The [NASA Exoplanet Archive][0] offers bulk data downloads which actually only
provides scripts for the bulk-download that in turn use `wget`. If you don't
have `wget` installed or you simply want to extract all URLs instead of
downloading them, this is where *dtools* comes in handy.

For example, you can download the [KELT] timeseries data from [here][1] (in
[IPAC Table Format] which can be read by [astropy]), extract the `.bat` files
and pass them to the script to extract the download URLs, or download them
immediately.

__Extract URLs__

    niklas@lx1 ~/repos/dtools
    $ nodepy3 nasa/exoplanetarchive extract-urls KELT_N*_wget.bat
    http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu:80/data/ETSS//KELT2/005/055/28/KELT_N02_lc_000001_V01_east_raw_lc.tbl
    http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu:80/data/ETSS//KELT2/005/055/73/KELT_N02_lc_000001_V01_east_tfa_lc.tbl
    http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu:80/data/ETSS//KELT2/005/055/28/KELT_N02_lc_007676_V01_west_raw_lc.tbl
    ...

__Execute Bulk Download__

    niklas@lx1 ~/repos/dtools
    $ nodepy3 nasa/exoplanetarchive bulk-download KELT_N*_wget.bat \
        --to ~/Desktop/KELT --parallel 4
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,556]: Spawning 4 threads ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,557]: Thread 0 started.
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,557]: Thread 1 started.
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,557]: Thread 2 started.
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,557]: Thread 3 started.
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,559]: Downloading "KELT_N04_lc_000001_V01_east_raw_lc.tbl" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,559]: Downloading "KELT_N04_lc_000001_V01_east_tfa_lc.tbl" ...
    [INFO - 2017-07-04 16:12:23,561]: Downloading "KELT_N04_lc_020344_V01_west_raw_lc.tbl" ...
    ...

  [0]: https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/bulk_data_download/
  [1]: https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/bulk_data_download/KELT_wget.tar.gz
  [KELT]: https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/docs/KELT.html
  [IPAC Table Format]: http://irsa.ipac.caltech.edu/applications/DDGEN/Doc/ipac_tbl.html
  [astropy]: http://docs.astropy.org

> **Tip**: You can use the [KELT] website to go to the Timeseries or Praesepe
> database search pages, conduct an empty search, wait for the results and then
> download the whole database in various formats (including IPAC .tbl and CSV).
